A computational model to optimize the increment in hospital beds in case of non-availability: a case study with the data of New York City for early dynamics of COVID-19 and its extension

Codes and data to reproduce the results and figures in the preprint. In each folder, the file main_X.m must be run.

Author list: Tuğba Akman

Abstract: In this work, we propose a structurally identifiable SEIR-type model for COVID-19 using the data of New York City recorded before any intervention strategy was implemented. Specifically, the daily number of COVID-19 cases, hospitalizations and deaths are used to calibrate the model so that we can obtain realistic parameter values to simulate interventions as the next step. Before any attempt to simulate interventions, it is important to check if the model is structurally identifiable. In general, different parameter values may result in the same solution curves for a structurally non-identifiable model. Simulated intervention strategies  with such a model may lead to misleading results. After model calibration is completed, practical identifiability analysis, that shows uncertainties in the parameter vales, is performed. We observe that three of the model parameters are not practically identifiable meaning that one must be careful in case of any perturbations in that parameter values to model the same data set. With the emergence of COVID-19 cases, it has been very critical to decide the best intervention strategy to control the spread of the virus within the population. Therefore, we extend our first model to construct an optimal control problem (OCP) with the goal of minimizing the number of severely infected individuals who cannot be hospitalized due to non-availability of hospital beds by controlling the increment in hospital beds. To achieve this goal, we extend our first model with two more compartments, namely $I_{hq} := I_{hq}(t)$ and $Q := Q(t)$. Compartment $I_{hq}$ denotes severely infected individuals who need hospitalization, but they have to stay at home due to lack of hospital beds and compartment $Q$ stands for individuals staying at home due to quarantine. Here, our intention is not to criticize the interventions that were issued during COVID-19 pandemic. Instead, we try to find out what can be learnt via mathematical modelling to increase the available hospital beds in case of a future pandemic. Therefore, we do not use any real data recorded during stay-at-home order in New York City or any other city. Instead, we choose the model parameters from our first model, where no control measures were applied, to construct the OCP in a biologically feasible way. We observe that increasing the number of beds for the first two weeks of quarantine results in a decrease in the number of deaths. Therefore, we propose based on our mathematical models that it is very critical to be prepared for a future pandemic and to enrich hospital capacities so that more lives can be saved.
